doc(gpu): update documentation for v1.1 release (#2232)
zama-ai/tfhe-rs: tfhe/docs/tutorials/multi_gpu_device_selection.md

# Improving throughput on multiple-GPUs

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This guide walks through a practical example of performing a large batch of encrypted 64-bit additions using manual GPU dispatching to improve the performance.
```

> By default, when multiple GPUs are available on the machine TFHE-rs automatically uses them all
> to perform encrypted operations. Under the hood, it has a hard-coded logic for how
> to dispatch work onto all the GPUs, and it also automatically copies the necessary data (like the server key) to all GPUs.
> This approach is efficient for operations that load the GPU extensively (e.g. the 64-bit multiplication),
> but not so much for smaller operations like the encrypted addition or comparison on 64-bits.
> This is why it is also possible to select which GPU to operate on.
> In this tutorial, an example of execution of a large batch of additions of encrypted 64-bit integers is described.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By default, when multiple GPUs are available on the machine, TFHE-rs automatically uses them all
to perform encrypted operations. Under the hood, it includes a hard-coded logic to dispatch work across all the GPUs and to copy essential data—like the server key—to each GPU. 

This approach is efficient for operations that load the GPU extensively (e.g. the 64-bit multiplication),
but not so much for smaller operations like the encrypted addition or comparison on 64-bits.

To address this, TFHE-rs also provides mechanisms to manually select which GPU to operate on. 
```

## Dispatch operations on the GPUs of your choice

> Compared to a default GPU execution with TFHE-rs, two things change when selecting a specific GPU to execute on:
> - it is necessary to create a GPU server key on each GPU specifically,
> - the batch of operations has to be distributed on all the GPUs manually.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When selecting a specific GPU to execute on, there are two essential requirements that are different than a default GPU execution:
- You must create a GPU server key on each GPU individually.
- The batch of operations must be distributed on all the GPUs manually.
```

> Let's see this in practice. First of all, the GPU server key has to be specifically decompressed to each GPU, so that
> it is available in memory on all of them. Normally, one would write: 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Step 1: Decompress the server key to each GPU
Instead of a single server key being used across all GPUs automatically, you’ll need specifically depress the server key to each GPU, so that the key is available in memory. 
For example, by default, the GPU server key is decompressed and loaded onto all available GPUs automatically as follows: 
```

```rust
use tfhe::{ConfigBuilder, set_server_key, ClientKey, CompressedServerKey};
use tfhe::prelude::*;
use rayon::prelude::*;
fn main() {
    let config = ConfigBuilder::default().build();

    let client_key = ClientKey::generate(config);
    let compressed_server_key = CompressedServerKey::new(&client_key);

    let sks = compressed_server_key.decompress_to_gpu();
}
```

> Instead, we can create a vector of server keys, each on a specific GPU:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, to use the multi-GPU selection feature, you can create a vector of server keys, each on a specific GPU:
```

```rust
use tfhe::{ConfigBuilder, set_server_key, ClientKey, CompressedServerKey, GpuIndex};
use tfhe::prelude::*;
use rayon::prelude::*;
use tfhe::core_crypto::gpu::get_number_of_gpus;
fn main() {
    let config = ConfigBuilder::default().build();

    let client_key = ClientKey::generate(config);
    let compressed_server_key = CompressedServerKey::new(&client_key);

    let num_gpus = get_number_of_gpus();
    let sks_vec = (0..num_gpus)
        .map(|i| compressed_server_key.decompress_to_specific_gpu(GpuIndex::new(i)))
        .collect::<Vec<_>>();
}
```

> Now, let's define some inputs to operate on. We will be doing 100 additions in parallel on each GPU:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Step 2: Define the inputs to operate on
We will be doing 100 additions in parallel on each GPU:
```

```rust
use tfhe::{ConfigBuilder, set_server_key, ClientKey, CompressedServerKey, FheUint64, GpuIndex};
use tfhe::prelude::*;
use rayon::prelude::*;
use tfhe::core_crypto::gpu::get_number_of_gpus;
use rand::{thread_rng, Rng};
fn main() {
    let config = ConfigBuilder::default().build();

    let client_key = ClientKey::generate(config);
    let compressed_server_key = CompressedServerKey::new(&client_key);

    let num_gpus = get_number_of_gpus();
    let sks_vec = (0..num_gpus)
        .map(|i| compressed_server_key.decompress_to_specific_gpu(GpuIndex::new(i)))
        .collect::<Vec<_>>();
    
    let batch_size = num_gpus * 100;

    let mut rng = thread_rng();
    let left_inputs = (0..batch_size)
        .map(|_| FheUint64::encrypt(rng.gen::<u64>(), &client_key))
        .collect::<Vec<_>>();
    let right_inputs = (0..batch_size)
        .map(|_| FheUint64::encrypt(rng.gen::<u64>(), &client_key))
        .collect::<Vec<_>>();
}
```
At this stage, the left and right inputs reside on the CPU. They have not yet been copied to the GPU. 

> Now to the second stage: let's split the calculation into as many chunks as there are GPUs. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Step3: Dispatch the workloads
Now you need to split the calculation into as many chunks as there are GPUs. 
```

> It is possible to execute additions in parallel over each GPU, thanks to the use of 
> [Cuda streams](https://developer.nvidia.com/blog/gpu-pro-tip-cuda-7-streams-simplify-concurrency/). 
> The creation of Cuda streams is not explicit when using TFHE-rs' HL API, but it's hidden in the calls to 
> `set_server_key`. In this way, when calling `par_iter()` on a variable in the HL API, if the execution happens on GPU
> it has the behavior that one would expect from `par_iter()`.
> This is what we'll use to get the best possible throughput on a multi-GPU machine. Here's the code to create chunks of
> data to operate on for each GPU, then to call additions on each chunk in parallel, thanks to the (hidden) use of 
> Cuda streams:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
TFHE-rs allows you to execute additions in parallel across multiple GPUs by leveraging [CUDA streams](https://developer.nvidia.com/blog/gpu-pro-tip-cuda-7-streams-simplify-concurrency/). While CUDA stream management is typically not explicit in High-Level(HL) APl , TFHE-rs handles it behind the scenes.

In the HL API of TFHE-rs, CUDA streams are implicitly created through calls to `set_server_key`. As a result, when you use `.par_iter()` on encrypted data within the HL API, and that computation is dispatched to a GPU, it behaves as expected—executing in parallel using CUDA streams.

We’ll take advantage of this behavior to maximize throughput on a multi-GPU machine. In the following example, we split a large batch of encrypted 64-bit additions across multiple GPUs. Each GPU processes its own chunk of data in parallel, thanks to the hidden creation of CUDA streams under the hood:
```

    let num_gpus = get_number_of_gpus();
    let sks_vec = (0..num_gpus)
        .map(|i| compressed_server_key.decompress_to_specific_gpu(GpuIndex::new(i)))
        .collect::<Vec<_>>();

    let batch_size = num_gpus * 100;

    let mut rng = thread_rng();
    let left_inputs = (0..batch_size)
        .map(|_| FheUint64::encrypt(rng.gen::<u64>(), &client_key))
        .collect::<Vec<_>>();
    let right_inputs = (0..batch_size)
        .map(|_| FheUint64::encrypt(rng.gen::<u64>(), &client_key))
        .collect::<Vec<_>>();

    let chunk_size = (batch_size / num_gpus) as usize;
    left_inputs
        .par_chunks(chunk_size)
        .zip(
            right_inputs
                .par_chunks(chunk_size)
        )
        .enumerate()
        .for_each(
            |(i, (left_inputs_on_gpu_i, right_inputs_on_gpu_i))| {
                left_inputs_on_gpu_i
                    .par_iter()
                    .zip(right_inputs_on_gpu_i.par_iter())
                    .for_each(|(left_input, right_input)| {
                        set_server_key(sks_vec[i].clone());
                        let _ = left_input + right_input;
                    });
            },
        );
}
```

> By using `par_chunks`, with a chunk size of `batch_size / num_gpus`, we split the calculation over the different GPUs.
> Calling `par_iter` on each chunk allows to perform the addition in parallel on each GPU, thanks to the call to:
> `set_server_key(sks_vec[i].clone())`. This function creates a new Cuda stream on the GPU `i`, in order to 
> have parallel execution on that GPU. It is worth noting that in this example, when calling `+` on the encrypted inputs,
> data is transferred from the CPU to the GPU before computation. The result is data residing on GPU `i`. 
> You can check on which device data resides in TFHE-rs by following the examples in this file: 
> `tfhe/src/high_level_api/tests/gpu_selection.rs`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this example, `par_chunks` divides the input vectors into `num_gpus` chunks—one per GPU. Each chunk is then processed in parallel using `.par_iter()`. Inside the inner loop, calling `set_server_key(sks_vec[i].clone())` sets the context for the GPU `i` and implicitly creates a new CUDA stream for GPU `i`. This enables parallel execution on each device.

It’s important to note that, in this example, when using the `+` operator on encrypted inputs, data is first transferred from the CPU to the GPU before computation, the result then resides on the GPU `i`.

You can learn more about about how to inspect which GPU a piece of data resides from the examples in this file: `tfhe/src/high_level_api/tests/gpu_selection.rs`.
```

> ## Going beyond, by restricting the number of Cuda streams

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Going beyond: Restrict the number of CUDA streams
```

> The behavior of `par_iter()` in the HL API of TFHE-rs corresponds to what one expects,
> but it actually has a downside for performance. Indeed, one limitation of the Cuda streams is that they become
> hard to schedule when there are many of them, and calculations end up being done sequentially if there are too many.
> Already with 100 streams per GPU this is restricting the throughput. Instead, we can go beyond the
> example above by defining a number of streams to be used per GPU. This number depends on the functions to be 
> executed, but generally speaking it is good to keep the number of streams as low as possible while loading the GPUs as 
> much as possible. For the 64-bit addition, we can use 4 streams per GPU: this means that during the execution, on each GPU we 
> will launch batches of 4 additions in parallel, as many times as necessary to treat all inputs. This can be written as follows:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While the behavior of `.par_iter()` in TFHE-rs' HL API aligns with expectations and provides parallelism over encrypted data, it can become a performance bottleneck in some cases. This is due to the way CUDA streams are managed.

CUDA streams allow for parallel execution on the GPU, but when too many are created, scheduling becomes inefficient. Instead of running in parallel, operations may fall back to sequential execution. In practice, having around 100 streams per GPU already starts to negatively impact throughput.

To address this, we can limit the number of streams used per GPU. The optimal number depends on the type of operation, but the general rule is: use as few streams as possible while still fully utilizing the GPU.

For example, in the case of 64-bit encrypted additions, using 4 streams per GPU offers a good balance. Each GPU processes inputs in chunks of 4 operations in parallel, repeating this in batches until all inputs are handled.

Here’s how this approach looks in code:
```

        .zip(
            right_inputs
                .par_chunks(chunk_size)
                .zip(amounts.par_chunks(chunk_size)),
        )
        .enumerate()
        .for_each(
            |(i, (left_inputs_gpu_i, (right_inputs_gpu_i, amount_gpu_i)))| {
                let stream_chunk_size = left_inputs_gpu_i.len() / num_streams_per_gpu;
                left_inputs_gpu_i
                    .par_chunks(stream_chunk_size)
                    .zip(right_inputs_gpu_i.par_chunks(stream_chunk_size))
                    .zip(amount_gpu_i.par_chunks(stream_chunk_size))
                    .for_each(
                        |((left_inputs_chunk, right_inputs_chunk), amount_chunk)| {
                            set_server_key(sks_vec[i].clone());
                            left_inputs_chunk
                                .iter()
                                .zip(right_inputs_chunk.iter().zip(amount_chunk.iter()))
                                .for_each(|(left_input, (right_input, amount))| {
                                    let _ = left_input + right_input;
                                });
                        },
                    );
            },
        );
}
```

> Compared to the example of the previous section, here we define a number of streams per GPU, then
> call `par_chunks()` of the batch of inputs of each GPU to split the load between the streams. In this way
> it is possible to reach optimal performance on multiple GPUs with TFHE-rs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this version, we:
- Define a number of streams per GPU
- Split the load between the streams by calling `par_chunks()` of the batch of each GPU's input.
This method provides a more fine-controlled form of parallelism, reaching an optimal performance on multiple GPUs with TFHE-rs.
```
